---
layout: default
---
# Quality and Diversity Optimization: A Unifying Modular Framework

## Overview
* Presents a unifying framework of QD optimization algorithms.
* Propose QD algorithms with new selection mechanism.
* Presents new collection management that overcomes the erosion issues observed when using unstructured collections.

## Related Work

### Quality Diversity Algorithms
* A QD optimization algorithm aims to produce a large collection of solutions that are both as diverse and high-performing as possible, which covers
a particular domain, called the descriptor space.


### Novely Search Algorithm
* Following this idea of a non performance-based diversity mechanism, the novelty search algorithm introduces the idea of searching for solutions that are different from the previous ones, without considering their quality.
* This concept is applied by optimizing a "novelty score" that characterizes the difference of a solution compared to those already encountered, which are stored in a "novelty archive".
* The novelty score is computed as the average distance of the k-nearest neighboring solutions that currently are in the novelty archive.
* When the novelty score of a solution exceeds a predefined threshold, this solution is added to the archive.

### Novely Search with Local Competition
* The NSLC algorithm focuses on solutions that are both novel (according to the novelty score) and locally high-performing.
* This is achieved with a "local quality score" that is defined as the number of the k-nearest neighboring solutions in the novelty archive with a lower performance than the considered solution.
* Only the first encountered solution of each type is added to the archive. This implies that when finding a better solution for a solution type already present in the archive, this solution is not added to the archive. This mechanism prevents the archive from improving over time.
* Exploration is achieved with a multiobjective optimization algorithm that optimizes both novelty and local quality scores of the solutions.
* The final result of NSLC is the population of the optimization algorithm, which contains solutions that are both novel and high-performing compared to other local solutions.

### Behavioral Repertoire Evolution
* BR-Evolution is a variant of NSLC that progressively improve the archive's quality by replacing the solutions that are kept in the archive with better ones as soon as they are found.
* It has been noticed that the archive improvement mechanism may "erode" the borders and alter the coverage of the collection.
* The novelty archive of the original NSLC algorithm had a better coverage of the descriptor space (but with lower performance scores) than the one from the BR-Evolution.

### MAP-Elites
* In MAP-Elites, the population of the algorithms is the collection itself, and the selection, mutations and preservation mechanisms directly consider the solutions that are stored in the collection.
* The descriptor space is discretized and represented as a grid. Initially, this grid is empty and the algorithm starts with a randomly generated set of solutions.
* After evaluating each solution and recording its associated descriptor, these solutions are potentially added to the corresponding grid cells.
* If the cell is empty, then the solution is added to the grid, otherwise, only the best solution among the new one and the one already in the grid is kept.
* After the initialization, a solution is randomly selected via a uniform distribution among those in the grid, and is mutated.
* The new solution obtained after the mutation is then evaluated and fitted back in the grid.
* This selection/mutation/evaluation loop is repeated several millions times, which progressively improves the coverage and the quality of the collection.
* MAP-Elites generates better behavior collections while being faster than the BR-Evolution algorithm.
* The obligation to discretize the descriptor space may be limiting for some applications, and the uniform random selection may not be suitable for particularly large collections.

## Content

### Unify Framework for QD Algorithms
* This framework demonstrates that MAP-Elites and NSLC can be formulated as the same algorithm using a different combination of operators.
* This new formulation is composed of two main operators:
	- A container, which gathers and orders the solutions into a collection
	- A selection operator, which selects the solutions that will be altered
* The QD Algorithm based on this framework follows four steps that are repeated:
	1. Selection operator produces a new set of individual that will be altered to form offsprings
	2. The offsprings are evaluated and their performance and descriptor are recorded
	3. Each offspring is potentially added to the container
	4. Update scores such as novely, local competition etc...
* The main purpose of a container is to gather all the solutions found so far into an ordered collection, in which only
the best and most diverse solutions are kept.
* The two container types are:
	- Grid: MAP-Elites employs an N-dimensional grid to form the collection of solutions.
	- Archive: The novelty archive introduced in the novelty search algorithm consists of an unstructured collection of solutions that are only organized according to their descriptor and their Euclidean distance.
* There are different selection operators:
	- No Selection: Generate random solutions
	- Uniform Random Selection: select solutions with a uniform probability from those that are already in the collection as in MAP-Elites
	- Score Proportionate Selection: bias the selection according to a particular score
	- Population Based Selection: select individuals from the population instead of collection as in NSLC
	- Pareto Based Selection

### New Collection Management Container
* Problems with Archive container:
	- using the novelty score as a criterion to add the solution in the container is likely to show an uneven density of solutions
	- the replacement of individuals by better ones can erode the border of the collection
* The new collection management container only adds a solution to the archive if the distance to its nearest neighbor exceeds a predefined threshold.
* If the distance between the new individual and its nearest neighbor is lower than the theshold, then the new individual replaces its nearest neighbour only if
	- its distance from its second nearest neighbor exceeds the threshold, and
	- it improves the overall quality of the collection.

### New Selection Operator
* A Score Proportionate Selector based on a curiosity score.
* The curiosity score represents the propensity of an individual to generate offspring that are added to the collection.
* A practical implementation consists of increasing the curiosity score of an individual (initially set to zero) each time one of its offspring is added to the collection. Conversely, when an offspring fails to be added to the archive the curiosity score is decreased by 0.5.
* A similar approach has recently been introduced to bias the selection by using the same kind of successful offspring counter.

## Experiment
* The overall performance of a QD algorithm is defined by the quality of the produced collection of solutions according to three criteria
	- The coverage of descriptor space.
	- The uniformity of the coverage.
	- The performance of the solution found for each type.
* Considered three experimental scenarios in simulation to compare different combinations of containers and selection operators:
	- robotic arm discovering how to reach points in its vicinity
	- six-legged robot learning to walk in every direction.
	- six-legged robot searching for a large number of ways to walk on a straight line
* Quality metrics to compare the quality of the collections generated by each variant
	- Collection size
	- Maximal qualtiy
	- Total quality
	- Total novelty

### Robotic Arm
* The collections using the archive-based container appear very similar to those using the other container type. This similarity demonstrates that the archive management introduced in this paper successfully address the erosion issues described previously.
* The coverage, maximal quality, total quality, and total novelty of the collections produced with selection operators considering the entire collections is higher than those using population-based selection.

### Six Legged Robot in Every Direction
* The objective of the QD algorithms is to produce a collection of behaviors that allows the robot to walk in every direction and at different speeds.
* The quality metrics indicate that the curiosity variants (new selector), on both grid and archive containers, significantly outperform the other algorithms.

### Six Legged Robot in Forward Direction
* The robot has to learn a large collection of gaits to walk in a straight line as fast as possible.
* The curiosity-based selection operator shows the best results both with the grid-based and the archive-based containers.




