---
layout: default
---
# Illuminating Search Spaces by Mapping Elites

## Overview
* Introduces MAP-Elites algorithm that produces a large diversity of high-performing solutions.

## Related Work

### Evolution Algorithms
* A solution is an organism, or phenotype or individual that is described by a genotype.
* The actions performed by the organism is the organism's behavior.
* The performance or quality of a solution is called its fitness.
* The way of stochastically producing new solutions is to
	- take an existing solution and mutate its genotype, or
	- by sampling portions of two parent descriptors, a process called crossover.
* To encourage a broad exploration of the search space, many modern evolutionary algorithms encourage diversity through a variety of different techniques
	- Increasing mutation rate
	- Explicitly selecting for genetic diversity
	- Changing structure of the population

### Novelty Search
* Novelty Search can perform better than performance-driven search on deceptive problems.
* The user defines how to measure the distance between behaviors, and then Novelty Search seeks to produce as many different behaviors as possible according to this distance metric.
* Novelty Search contains both a current population and an archive of previous solutions that serves as a memory of which points in the feature space have been visited.
* Given that Novelty Search rewards individuals that are distant from each other in the feature space, having only a population would lead to "cycling", a phenomenon where the population moves from one area of the feature space to a new area and back again, without any memory of where it has already explored.

### Novelty Search with Local Competition
* NSLC is a multi-objective algorithm with two objectives:
	- maximizing an organism's performance relative to its closest 15 neighbors
	- maximizing a novelty objective, which rewards organisms the further they are in feature space from their 15 closest neighbors

### Multi-Ojbective Landscape Exploration Algorithm
* An illumination algorithm designed to return the highest-performing solution at each point in the feature space. 
* MOLE features one global performance competition.

## Content
* Most search algorithms focus on finding one or a small set of high-quality solutions in a search space.
* A problem with most search algorithms is that they try to follow a path that will lead to the best global solution by relying on the heuristic that
random changes to good solutions lead to better solutions. 
* This approach does not work for highly deceptive problems because in such problems one has to cross low-performing valleys to find the global optima.

### Multi-dimensional Archive of Phenotype Elites (MAP-Elites)
* The benefits of MAP are:
	- Allowing users to create diversity in the dimensions of variation they choose
	- Illuminating the fitness potential of the entire feature space and not just high-performing areas
	- the algorithm often finds a better solution than the current state-of-the-art search algorithms in complex search spaces because it explores more of the feature space.
	- Returns a large set of diverse, high-performing individual
* MAP-Elites algorithm overview
	1. User chooses a fitness metric to evalute a solution.
	2. User chooses $N$ dimensions of variation of interest that define a feature space. Each dimension of variation is discretized based on user preference or available computational resources.
	3. MAP-Elites will search for the highest performing solution for each cell in the $N$-dimensional feature space.
* MAP-Elites procedure:
	1. Randomly generating genomes and determining the performance and features of each then place them into corresponding cell.
	2. A cell in the map is randomly chosen and the genome in that cell produces an offspring via mutation and/or crossover.
	3. The features and performance of that offspring are determined, and the offspring is placed in the cell if 
		- the cell is empty or 
		- the offspring is higher-performing than the current occupant of the cell, in which case that occupant is discarded.
	4. Repeat 2-3 until termination criterion is reached.
* It is not guaranteed that all cells in the feature space will be filled.
* There are many genotypes that can be mapped to the same cell in the feature space, perhaps an infinite number.
* MAP-Elites map the entire feature space to inform users about what is possible and the various tradeoffs between features and performance.
* MAP-Elites is also a powerful optimization algorithm.
* One drawback to MAP-Elites is that it does not allow the addition of new types of cells over time that did not exist in the original feature space. It thus, by definition, cannot exhibit open-ended evolution.


## Experiment
* Evaluates the quality of illuminating algorithms and optimizatio algorithms using the following measures:
	- Global Performance: the single highest performing solution found by that algorithm anywhere in the search space divided by the highest performance possible in that domain.
	- Global reliability: the average across all cells of the highest-performing solution the algorithm found for each cell.
	- Precision: if an algorithm returns a solution in a cell, that solution will be high-performing relative to what is possible for that cell.
	- Coverage: Measures how many cells of the feature space a run of an algorithm is able to fill.
* Compare MAP-Elites to three other algorithms:
	- Traditional Evolutionary Algorithm
	- NSLC
	- Random sampling 

### Neural Network
* The problem involves a neural network that receives stimuli from an eight-pixel retina. Patterns shown on the retina's left and
right halves may each contain an object. Networks have to answer whether an object is present on both the left and right sides of the retina.
* Create a 2D feature space where the first feature dimension is connection cost and second feature dimension is network modularity.
* The results reveal that MAP-Elites scores significantly higher than the three control algorithms on all four criteria 

### Simulated Soft Robot Morphologies
* Soft robots are made of soft, deformable materials.
* It has previously been shown that an evolutionary algorithm can produce a diversity of soft robots morphologies that move in different ways.
* Use MAP-Elites to:
	- produce a large diversity of morphologies within one run 
	- produce high-performing morphologies for a range of levels of bone use and body size, and combinations thereof
* In this domain, MAP-Elites does a far better job than the controls of revealing the fitness potential of each area of the feature space, which is the goal of illumination algorithms
* MAP-Elites produce far more high-performing solutions than other controls algorithm.

### Real Robotic Arm
* Test whether MAP-Elites can help find controllers for a real, physical, soft robot arm.
* We evaluated MAP-Elites and two controls
	- random sampling
	- traditional grid search algorithm
* MAP-Elites outperforms both grid search and random sampling.

## Future Work
* Possible variation of the algorithm:
	- Storing more than one genome per feature cell to promote diversity
	- Biasing the choice of which cells produce offspring



