---
layout: default
---
# An Approach to Evolve and Exploit Repertoires of General Robot Behaviors

## Overview
* Introduce EvoRBC-II, an approach that enables the evolution of repertoires composed of general closed-loop behaviors that can respond to robot's sensory inputs.

## Related Work

### Evolutionary Algorithms
* Evolutionary robotics is the field of research that employs evolutionary computation to generate robots that are adapted to their environment and task through a process inspired by natural evolution.
* Works on evolutionary robotics have mainly been focused on evolving robot controllers that are able to solve a single well-defined task.

### Novelty Search
* Novelty search algorithm and quality diversity algorithms work by rewarding behavioural novelty instead of scoring solutions solely based on task performance.
*  Behavioural diversity based methods differ from the more traditional approaches that promote genetic diversity in the sense that differences between candidate solutions are computed based on the actual behaviour of the robot in the environment and not in its genotype.

### EvoRBC
* An evolutionary approach that combines the novelty-driven evolution of behaviour repertoires with the hierarchical control synthesis approach.
* The high-level arbitrator receives the sensor readings from the robot, and outputs the mapping values.
* The mapping values are fed to a mapping function, which selects the corresponding low-level locomotion primitive.
* In EvoRBC, beahaviors in repertoire are restricted to open-loop control and locomotion primitives.
* Open-loop refers to controllers that do not have access to the robot's sensors readings.
* Rely on the MAP-Elites algorithm for the repertoire generation.

### NEAT
* NEAT evolves both the weights and the topologies of the networks, meaning that the experimenter does not have to specify the neural network architecture.


## Content
* In general, a behaviour-based control system can be viewed as a structured network of behaviour modules, each of which achieves and/or maintains a specific goal.
* Instead of relying on a monolithic controller, the robots can be controlled by combining and selecting behaviours from the repertoire. 
* Hierarchical control allows for the composition of increasingly complex controllers that leverage previously evolved primitives.


### EvoRBC-II
* EvoRBC-II extends EvoRBC to higher-level closed-loop behaviour primitives.
* Closed-loop refers to controllers that take the robot's current sensor readings as input. 
* The two main steps of EvoRBC-II 
	1. Repertoire Evolution
	2. Arbitrator Evolution
* Repertoire Evolution
	- We rely on the novelty search algorithm to generate a set of diverse primitives.
	- Each primitive is a neural network, and the evolutionary process is implemented using the NEAT neuroevolution algorithm.
	- Each primitive is evaluated in 100 independent trials in a randomly generated environment. In each trial, the robot executes the primitive for a fixed amount of time and the behavior is characterized. The behavior characterizations in all trials are than aggregated to obtain the average behaviour characterisation.
	- Primitive behaviors are characterized using Systematically Derived Behaviour Characterisations.
	- Characteristic is composed of seven behavior features:
		- Mean distance to wall
		- Mean distance to all obstacles
		- Mean distance to closest obstacle
		- Mean distance to all POI (Point of Interest)
		- Mean distance to closest POI
		- Mean linear speed
		- Mean turn speed
* Arbitrator Evolution
	- The arbitrator is a high-level controller that receives the robot's sensory readings and determines which behaviour primitive should be used to control the robot at each moment.
	- The robot's sensors value are then fed to the selected primitive which in turn outputs the values that are used to control the actuators of the robot.
	- The rbitrator is a decision tree induced with genetic programming, in which the splits are based on the sensor values. The classes(nodes) of the decision tree correspond to primitives in the respertoire.
	- The decision trees are evolved using tree-based strong-typed genetic programming.
* Using closed-loop primitives, the top-level arbitrator tends to remain significantly more simple, since the more complex sensor-actuator mappings are handled by the primitives at the lower level
* Hierarchical behavior decomposition offers significant advantages:
	- Achieve more complex behaviors
	- Enabling incremental transfer to real robots
	- Behaviour reuse, meaning that previously evolved controllers can potentially be reused to rapidly solve new tasks or face new challenges
	- More understandable

## Experiment
* The experiments are conducted in a 2D simulated environment modeled in the MASON simulator
* To access the versability and reusablity of the evolved repertoire using EvoRBC-II, we defined experiments for a broad range of tasks:
	- Foraging: The objective is for the robot to collect as many POIs as possible during a simulation
	- Foraging-O: Foraging task with obstacles
	- Photoaxis: A single static POI is randomly placed in the environment, and the objective is for the robot to reach it as quickly as possible.
	- Photoaxis-O: Photoaxis task with obstacles
	- Exploration: In an environment with randomly placed obstacles, the objective is for the robot to explore as much of the environment as possible within the given time.
	- Maze: The robot starts in the centre of the environment, with several obstacles randomly placed around it, and must reach the environment's boundaries without colliding with obstacles
	- Avoidance: A number of dynamic POIs are placed in the environment, and the robot must maintain a safety distance (25 cm) from all POIs.
	- Prey: One dynamic POI is always moving towards the robot at 75% the robot's maximum speed, in an environment with randomly placed obstacles. The robot must avoid the dynamic POI.
	- Tracking: One dynamic POI with random movement is placed in an environment with obstacles. The robot must stay as close as possible to the POI during the simulation.
* Compare EvoRBC-II with Tabular-rasa evolution and randomly generated respertoire.

### Repertoire Diversity
* Compare the evolved repertoire with a repertoire composed of randomly generated primitives.
* To visualise behavior space, the seven behaviour features were reduced to two using Robust Principal Component Analysis
* Around 250 generations were needed to fully cover the reachable behaviour space
* The results also show that novelty search is an effective exploration technique better than randomly generated repertoire.
* The volutionary process was able to evolve a highly diverse set of controllers with clearly distinguishable behaviors.

### Repertoire Quality
* We evolved 30 repertoires with novelty search, and randomly generated another 30 repertoires. 
* For each repertoire, we then evaluated all the primitives in the nine tasks, thus obtaining a fitness measure of how well each primitive performs in the given task.
* Note that there is no arbitrator involved yet: each primitive is used to control the robot in the given task from the start to the end of the simulation
* The best controllers evolved by tabula-rasa (TR) are able to achieve significantly higher fitness scores than the primitives in the NS-evolved repertoires.
* Most of the regions of the repertoire contain primitives that perform relatively well in some task. 
* Our results showed that the environments used to evolve the primitives in the repertoire can have a significant impact on the usefulness of those primitives

### Arbitrator Evolution
* We evaluate the full EvoRBC-II algorithm using ten different repertoires evolved with novelty search and compare it with
	- using primitives directly
	- tabula-rasa approach
* EvoRBC-II performs better in all tasks than using the primitives directly. This shows that combination of multiple primitives was always preferable to any single primitive in the repertoire.
* Comparing EvoRBC-II with tabula-rasa, EvoRBC-II achieves slightly inferior fitness scores in all task except for Maze.
* The arbitrator evolved for different task tends to use primitives from different regions of the respertoire.

## Future Work
* Generate primitives that would likely transfer successfully from simulation to the real robot.
* Using neural network arbitrators




