---
layout: default
---
# Evolution of Repertoire-Based Control for Robots with Complex Locomotor Systems

## Overview
* Explore Envolutionary Repertoire-Based Control on robots with complex locomotor systems

## Related Work

### Evolutionary Robotics
* Evolutionary robotics has been widely used in robots with complex locomotor systems as a method for gait optimization

### Quality Diversity Algorithms
* Traditional evolutionary processes typically converge to a single class of solutions.
* QD evolutionary algorithms can be used to automatically generate a comprehensive repertoire of solutions in a single evolutionary run.
* The purpose of QD algorithms is to discover a repertoire of high-quality solutions located in different regions of the behavior space.
* QD algorithms are therefore not optimization techniques, but rather exploration or illumination techniques.

### Hierarchical Control Sysnthesis
* EvoRBC takes inspiration from the hierarchical control synthesis approach, an engineering-oriented approach in which a goal task is recursively decomposed into simpler sub-tasks.
* The hierarchical control synthesis approach allows for the composition of increasingly complex controllers that leverage previously evolved primitives.

## Content
* Traditionally, evolutionary algorithms have been used to produce one specific locomotion pattern.
* The purpose of QD algorithms is to search for a diversity of optimized solutions, when applied to robot locomotion, the result of the process is a repertoire composed of a set of diverse locomotion behaviors.
* In most studies, the objective was to be able to move the robot, not to solve an actual task. EvoBRC is a technique for complex robots to perform tasks beyond mere locomotion.

### EvoBRC
* EvoRBC is an evolutionary approach that divides the evolution of robotic control in two main steps:
	1. The generation of a repertoire of primitives for a given robot, using a quality diversity algorithm.
	2. The evolution of a high-level arbitrator for a given task, which leverages the locomotion primitives evolved in the first step
* The high level arbitrator receives the sensor readings from the robot, and outputs the mapping values.
* The mapping values are fed to a mapping function, which selects the corresponding low-level locomotion primitive 
* Repertoire Generation:
	- We use the MAP-Elites algorithm to generate the repertoire.
	- A fitness score is assigned to each primitive based on a provided fitness metric. We experimented with three different fitness functions:
		- Circular fitness metric: Calculated based on the difference between the robots final orientation and a desired orientation for that point in space
		- Radial fitness metric: Similar to the circular fitness metric, but the desired orientation is the angle from the robot's starting position to the final position
		- Distance fitness metric: each point in space is reached traveling the shortest distance
* Mapping Function:
	- The mapping function maps the outputs of the arbitrator at each control cycle to a specific primitive in the repertoire
	- We experimented with two mapping functions:
		- Cartesian Mapping: Arbitrator outputs Cartesian coordinate in behavior space, then finds nearest primitive. 
		- Polar Mapping: Arbitrator outputs raidus the $\theta$. Maps to polar coordinates in behavior space, then finds nearest primitive.
* Arbitrator Evolution:
	- The arbitrator is a high-level controller that receives the robot's sensory readings and determines which behavior primitive should be executed by outputting mapping values.
	- The arbitrator is an evolved artificial neural network, where the activations of the output neurons are used as mapping values
	- Arbitrator is evolved using NEAT algorithm



## Experiment

### Four Wheel Steering Robot Simulation
* A simulated square-shaped four-wheel steering (4WS) robotic platform with up to 5 locomotion parameters, experimented with two robot types
	- 2 wheel steering robot that can only steer front wheels
	- 4 wheel steering robot that can steer front and rear wheels
* We used a maze navigation task where the robot must navigate a maze as quickly as possible.
* Compared EvoBRC to Standard Evolution algorithms
* The repertoires generated in EvoRBC varied significantly in terms of the behavior space regions that were reached.
* Standard evolution algorithm have worse performance on maze task for 4WS robot than 2WS robot due to increase complexity
* EvoBRC achieved similar performance for the two robot types, not affected by locomotive complexity.

### Fitness Metric
* The results of using these repertories for solving the maze task show that the circular fitness metric achieved the highest performance, followed by the radial fitness metric, and finally by the distance fitness metric

### Mapping Functions
* The different mapping functions cause different activation patterns to be evolved. 
* While the arbitrators evolved with the polar mapping choose, on average, a wider range of primitives, the arbitrators with the Cartesian mapping tend to focus on a narrower set of primitives
* There were no significant differences in performance between using the polar and the Cartesian mapping functions

### Hexapod Robot Simulatio 
* We actuated all 18 joints of the robot. The angle of each actuated joint at each time step is dictated by a time-dependent periodic function.
* The locomotion primitives for the hexapod are therefore parameters of the periodic functions that control the positions of the joints over time.
* We used a maze navigation task where the robot must navigate a maze as quickly as possible.
* EvoRBC was able to successfully reach the end-point of the maze in all five evolutionary runs
* Standard NEAT was unable to reach the same level of performance as EvoRBC

## Future Work
* Validate EvoRBC on real robots
* study if the same arbitrator can be used with different repertoires, evolved for different robots
* Explore how repertoires composed of more high-level behaviors, not just locomotion primitives




